draft-ralston-mimi-matrix-transport.md, before:

---
title: "Matrix Message Transport"
abbrev: "Matrix Message Transport"
category: info

docname: draft-ralston-mimi-matrix-transport-latest
submissiontype: IETF  # also: "independent", "IAB", or "IRTF"
number:
date:
consensus: true
v: 3
area: "Applications and Real-Time"
workgroup: "More Instant Messaging Interoperability"
keyword:
 - matrix
 - mimi
venue:
  group: "More Instant Messaging Interoperability"
  type: "Working Group"
  mail: "mimi@ietf.org"
  arch: "https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/mimi/"
  github: "turt2live/ietf-mimi-matrix-transport"
  latest: "https://turt2live.github.io/ietf-mimi-matrix-transport/draft-ralston-mimi-matrix-transport.html"

author:
 -
    fullname: Travis Ralston
    organization: The Matrix.org Foundation C.I.C.
    email: travisr@matrix.org

normative:

informative:


--- abstract

TODO Abstract


--- middle

# Introduction

TODO Introduction


# Conventions and Definitions

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}


# Security Considerations

TODO Security


# IANA Considerations

This document has no IANA actions.


--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

TODO acknowledge.

Commit message:

Write down the first words on Matrix as a Transport

draft-ralston-mimi-matrix-transport.md, after:

---
title: "Matrix Message Transport"
abbrev: "Matrix Message Transport"
category: info

docname: draft-ralston-mimi-matrix-transport-latest
submissiontype: IETF  # also: "independent", "IAB", or "IRTF"
number:
date:
consensus: true
v: 3
area: "Applications and Real-Time"
workgroup: "More Instant Messaging Interoperability"
keyword:
 - matrix
 - mimi
venue:
  group: "More Instant Messaging Interoperability"
  type: "Working Group"
  mail: "mimi@ietf.org"
  arch: "https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/mimi/"
  github: "turt2live/ietf-mimi-matrix-transport"
  latest: "https://turt2live.github.io/ietf-mimi-matrix-transport/draft-ralston-mimi-matrix-transport.html"

author:
 -
    fullname: Travis Ralston
    organization: The Matrix.org Foundation C.I.C.
    email: travisr@matrix.org

normative:
  RFC1123:
informative:


--- abstract

This document specifies an openly federated protocol, Matrix, for interoperable message transport.

--- middle

# Introduction

Designing transports for interoperable messaging can often be a race towards the lowest common denominator among the systems one is attempting to make interoperable. In addition to considering those systems' capabilities, the design must also account for a number of edge cases and routine failures that often come up during implementation, such as handling of network partitions/disconnects, malicious actors (intentional or accidental), and recovering from failure states.

[Matrix](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.4/) is an open standard created in 2014 to define interoperable, decentralized, communication. Having been actively maintained and improved upon since, a subset of the open standard fits extremely well within the More Instant Messaging Interoperability (MIMI) working group's efforts to establish standards for interoperable modern messaging applications. This document focuses on the transport (message- or event-passing) portion of the Matrix protocol as it relates to MIMI.

# Matrix Primatives

Within Matrix there are four key primatives needed for cross-server communication:

1. Homeservers (or simply "servers"), identified as {{RFC1123}} Host Names with extensions for IPv6, which act as a namespace for holding Users and copies of Rooms.
2. Rooms, identified as `!localpart:example.org`, consist of the Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) for Events sent by Users. The DAG is replicated across all participating Homeservers.
3. Events, identified as `$base64HashOfItself`, have a type (`m.room.message` or `m.room.encrypted`, for example) and are sent by Users, added to the Room by Homeservers. State Events are Events which are pinned in the room, usually tracking information about the room itself (membership, room name, topic, etc). State Events can be overwritten while other Events can not (though they can be "edited" by sending a new Event which points to the original Event).
4. Users, identified as `@localpart:example.org`, can have multiple devices (logged-in sessions) to join/leave Rooms and send Events to those rooms.

Other primatives do exist in Matrix, such as Devices for users, however they are not directly relevant to this document's purpose and have been excluded.

# Federation Basics and Eventual Consistency

Matrix uses a set of HTTP APIs to pass JSON objects between client and server, and server and server (federation). In its simplest form, a user sends an event to a room using the [Client-Server API](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.4/client-server-api/), which servers then forward to each other using the [Federation API](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.4/server-server-api/). The events which users send are populated with information about previous events (as known to the local server), "authorization events" (events which prove the sender is allowed to send the event in the first place), and additional server-specific signatures (to prove authenticity) by the server before the event is sent to other servers.

An example workflow might be that Alice (`@alice:s1.example.org`) wants to invite Bob (`@bob:s2.example.org`) to a room over federation (because the users are on different servers). Alice's client would send an `[/invite](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.4/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3roomsroomidinvite)` request for `@bob:s2.example.org` in that room, which causes `s1.example.org` to send a similar `[/invite](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.4/server-server-api/#put_matrixfederationv2inviteroomideventid)` request over federation to `s2.example.org`. When Bob has accepted the invite (by joining the room, using similar endpoints), the room's state and applicable history is copied to Bob's server and sent to Bob's client. Both Alice and Bob can now send events, including `m.room.message` events for instant messaging cases, and their servers will build a DAG off of them.

A key part of this eventually consistent model is a server can go offline (for any reason, including being affected by a Denial of Service (DoS) attack, network partition, or being turned off) and other servers in the room are not affected. The other servers can continue to send events into the room and amongst each other while the other server is offline. When that server comes back online, it will have the events it missed synchronized to it by the other servers. Similarly, if the offline server was operational but unable to send events to other servers, it can continue sending its own events to the room and have those events be "merged" with the other servers' events when network connectivity is restored. Conflicts with state events (two or more changes to the room state at the same time or by temporarily diverged servers, often due to network connectivity issues) are resolved using an appropriate [State Resolution Algorithm](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.4/server-server-api/#room-state-resolution). The state resolution algorithm is not covered here for brevity, and would likely be its own document.

# Interoperability

Matrix's split of Federation and Client-Server APIs allows homeservers to implement the API surface which is most relevant for its application, and apply industry standard load balancing techniques for handling larger deployments. The steps needed for an existing system to be interoperable with another over Matrix would mean implementing the Federation API and storing minimal information about the room's current state (state events (including members), a few of the most recent event identifiers seen, etc) and hooking that up to their existing application. An example of this happening is [Gitter speaking Matrix back in 2020](https://matrix.org/blog/2020/12/07/gitter-now-speaks-matrix).

As was the case with Gitter, existing messaging applications could deploy a homeserver using software which already exists to rapidly get connected to the Matrix network. Later stages of implementation for messaging applications might include writing proprietary software to handle application-specific traffic on one end and Matrix federation on the other, optimizing for internal scaling requirements.

# Security Considerations

TODO Security. Matrix has its own threat model that needs to be described here to prevent malicious actors.

--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

TODO acknowledge.
